Get to know Jailhouse
=====================

By Valentine Sinitsyn <valentine.sinitsyn@gmail.com>

Originally appeared in Linux Journal issue 252 (April 2015).
Minor fixes and updates applied.

As you read Linux Journal, you probably know Linux has rich
virtualization ecosystem. KVM is de-facto standard, VirtualBox is widely
used for desktop virtualization, veterans should remember Xen (it's
still in a good shape, by the way!) and there is also VMware (which
isn't free but runs on Linux as well). This is not to mention a
multitude of lesser-known hypervisors like educational lguest or hobbyst
Xvisor. In such crowded landscape, is there a place for a newcomer?

There is likely not much sense in creating Yet Another Linux-based
"versatile" hypervisor (except doing it just for fun, you know). But
there are some specific use cases which general-purpose solutions don't
address quite well. One of such areas is real-time virtualization, that
is frequently met in industrial automation, medicine,
telecommunications, and high-performance computing. In these
applications, dedicating a whole CPU or its core to the software that
runs bare-metal (with no underlying OS) is a way to meet strict deadline
requirements. While it is possible to pin KVM instance to processor core
and pass-through PCI devices to guests, tests [1] show the worst-case
latency may be above some realistic requirements. As usual with Free
Software, the situation is getting better with time, but there one other
thing.

And it's security. Sensitive software systems go through rigorous
certifications (like Common Criteria) or even formal verification
procedures. If you want them to run virtualized (say, for consolidation
purposes), the hypervisor must isolate them from non-certifiable
workloads. This implies the hypervisor itself must be small enough,
otherwise it may end up being larger (and more "suspicious") than the
software it segregates thus devastating the whole idea of isolation.

So looks like there is some room for a lightweight (for real-time camp),
small and simple (for security folks) open-source Linux-friendly
hypervisor for real-time and certifiable workloads. And it's where
Jailhouse comes into a play (this being said, safety, not security
is the primary focus at this point).

New guy in a block
------------------

Jailhouse was born in Siemens and is developed as Free Software project
(GPLv2) since November 2013. On May 2015, Jailhouse 0.5 was released to
general public. Jailhouse is rather young and more of research project
than ready-to-use tool, so it's a good time to get acquainted with it
now, and stay prepared to meet it in the production.

From the technical point of view, Jailhouse is static partitioning
hypervisor that runs bare-metal but cooperates with Linux closely. It
means Jailhouse doesn't emulate resources you don't have - it just
splits your hardware into isolated compartments called "cells" that are
wholly dedicated to guest software programs called "inmates". One of
these cells runs Linux OS and is known as "root cell"; other cells
borrow CPUs and devices from the root cell as they are created.
Besides Linux, Jailhouse supports bare-metal applications but
it can't run general-purpose OS (like Windows or FreeBSD) unmodified: as
discussed, there are plenty of other options, if you need to. One day,
Jailhouse may also support running KVM in the root cell, thus delivering
the best of two worlds.

As said above, Jailhouse cooperates with Linux closely and relies on it
for hardware bootstrapping, hypervisor launch and doing management tasks
(like creating new cells). Bootstrapping is really essential here, as it
is rather complex task for modern computers, and implementing it within
Jailhouse would make it a way more complex. This being said, Jailhouse
doesn't meld with the kernel as KVM (which is a kernel module on x86, or
even linked-in on ARM) does. It is loaded as firmware image (the same way
Wi-Fi adapters load their firmware blobs) and resides in dedicated memory
region which you should reserve at Linux boot time. Jailhouse's kernel
module (jailhouse.ko, also called "driver") loads the firmware and creates
/dev/jailhouse device which jailhouse userspace tool uses, but it doesn't
contain any hypervisor logic.

Jailhouse is an example of Asynchronous Multiprocessing (AMP)
architecture. Compared to traditional Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP)
systems, CPU cores in Jailhouse are not treated equal: say, cores 0 and
1 may run Linux and have access to SATA hard drive while core 2 runs a
bare-metal application which only has access to serial port. As most
computers Jailhouse can run on have shared L2/L3 caches, this means
there is a possibility for cache thrashing. To understand why it
happens, consider that Jailhouse maps the same guest physical memory
address (GPA) to different host (or real) physical address for different
inmates. If two inmates occasionally have the same GPA (naturally
containing diverse data) in the same L2/L3 cache line due to cache
associativity, they will interfere each other's work and degrade the
performance. This effect is yet to be measured, and Jailhouse currently
has no dedicated means to mitigate it. However there is a vision that
for many applications this performance loss won't be crucial. Future CPUs
may also introduce some QoS mechanisms to manage caches better. Moreover,
this issue is not specific in Jailhouse and also affects e.g. cloud platforms.

Now you have enough background to understand what Jailhouse is (and what
isn't). I hope you are interested; if it's the case, let's see how to
install and run it on your system.

Getting up-to-date
------------------

Sometimes you may need very latest KVM and QEMU to give Jailhouse a try.
KVM is part of the kernel, and updating the critical system component
just to try some new software would probably seem overkill. Luckily,
there is another way.

kvm-kmod [2] is a tool to take KVM modules from one kernel and compile
them for another, and is usually used to build latest KVM for your
current kernel. The build process is detailed in the README, but in a
nutshell you clone the repository, initialize a submodule (it's the
source for KVM) and run configure script followed by make. When modules
are ready, just insmod them instead of what your distribution provides
(don't forget to unload those first). If you want the change permanent,
run 'make modules_install'. kvm-kmod can take KVM sources fromever you
point to, but the defaults are usually sufficient.

Compiling QEMU is easier but more time-consuming. It follows the usual
'configure && make' procedure, and doesn't need to be installed
system-wide (which is package manager-friendly). Just put
'/path/to/qemu/x86_64-softmmu/qemu-system-x86_64' instead of plain
'qemu-system-x86_64' in the text's examples.

Building Jailhouse
------------------

Despite having a 0.5 release now, Jailhouse is still a young project
that is developed in quick paces. You are unlikely to find it in your
distribution's repositories for the same reasons, so the preferred way
to get Jailhouse is to build it from Git.

To run Jailhouse, you'll need a recent multicore VT-x-enabled Intel x86
64-bit CPU, and a motherboard with VT-d support. Version 0.5 introduced
support for AMD64 (albeit AMD IOMMU support is still in the works) and
ARM (v7 or better). At least 1GB RAM is recommended, and even more for
nested setup we discuss below. On software side, you'll need the usual
developer tools (make, gcc, git) and headers for your Linux kernel.

Running Jailhouse on real hardware isn't straightforward at this time,
and if you only want to play with it, there is a better alternative.
Given that you meet CPU requirements, the hypervisor should run well
under KVM/QEMU; this is known as nested setup. Jailhouse relies on some
bleeding-edge features, so you'll need at least Linux 3.17 and QEMU 2.1
for everything to work smoothly. Unless you are on rolling release
distribution, this could be a problem, so you may want to compile these
tools by yourself. This is detailed in the sidebar, and I suggest you
have a look at it even if you are lucky enough to have the required
versions pre-packaged: Jailhouse evolves and may need yet unreleased
features and fixes by the time you read this.

Make sure you have nested mode enabled in KVM. Both kvm-intel and
kvm-amd kernel modules accept 'nested=1' parameter which is responsible
just for that. You can set it manually, in modprobe command line (don't
forget to unload previous module's instance first). Alternatively, add
'options kvm-intel nested=1' (or similar kvm-amd line) to a new file
under /etc/modprobe.d.

You should also reserve memory for Jailhouse and inmates. To do this,
simply add 'memmap=66M$0x3b000000' to QEMU guest kernel command line.
For one-time usage, do this from the GRUB menu (press 'e', edit the
command line, press 'F10'). To make the change persistent, edit
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX variable in /etc/default/grub at QEMU guest side
and regenerate the configuration with grub-mkconfig. If you are using
GRUB 2, make sure you escape the dollar sign in 'memmap=' with three
slashes (\\\).

Now, take a JeOS edition of your favorite distribution. You can produce
one with SUSE Studio, ubuntu-vm-builder and similar, or just install a
minimal system the ordinary way yourself. It is recommended to have the
same kernel on the host and inside QEMU. Now, run the virtual machine as
(Intel CPU assumed):

qemu-system-x86_64 -machine q35 -m 1G -enable-kvm -smp 4 \
 -cpu kvm64,-kvm_pv_eoi,-kvm_steal_time,-kvm_asyncpf,-kvmclock,+vmx,+x2apic \
 -drive file=LinuxInstallation.img,id=disk,if=none \
 -fsdev local,path=/path/to/jailhouse,security_model=passthrough,id=vfs \
 -device virtio-9p-pci,addr=1f.7,mount_tag=host,fsdev=vfs \
 -device ide-hd,drive=disk -serial stdio -serial file:com2.txt

Note we enabled 9p (-virtfs) to access the host filesystem from QEMU
guest side; /path/to/jailhouse is where you are going to compile
Jailhouse now. Cd to this directory and run:

git clone git@github.com:siemens/jailhouse.git jailhouse cd jailhouse
make

Now, switch to the guest and mount 9p filesystem (for example, with
'mount -t 9p host /mnt'). Cd to /mnt/jailhouse and execute:

sudo make firmware_install sudo insmod jailhouse.ko

This copies Jailhouse binary image you've built to /lib/firmware and
inserts Jailhouse driver module. You can now enable Jailhouse with:

sudo tools/jailhouse enable configs/qemu-vm.cell

As the command returns, type 'dmesg | tail'. If you see "The Jailhouse
is opening." message, you've successfully launched the hypervisor, and
your Linux guest now runs under Jailhouse (which itself runs under
KVM/QEMU). If you get an error, it is an indication that your CPU misses
some required feature. If the guest hangs, this is most likely due to
your host kernel or QEMU are not up-to-date enough for Jailhouse, or
something is wrong with qemu-vm cell config. Jailhouse sends all its
messages to serial port, and QEMU simply prints them to the terminal
where it was started. Look at the messages to see what resource
(I/O port, memory and so on) caused the problem, and read on for the
details of Jailhouse configuration.

Configs and inmates
-------------------

Creating Jailhouse configuration files isn't straightforward. As the
codebase must be kept small, most of the logic that takes place
automatically in other hypervisors must be done manually here (albeit
with some help from the tools that come with Jailhouse). Compared to
libvirt or VirtualBox XML, Jailhouse configuration files are very
detailed and rather low-level. The configuration is currently expressed
in form of plain C files (found under configs/ in the sources) compiled
into raw binaries, however another format (like DeviceTree) could be
used in future versions.

Most of the time, you wouldn't need to create a cell config from
scratch, unless you authored a whole new inmate, or want the hypervisor
to run on your specific hardware (that's addressed in the sidebar).

Cell configuration files contain information like hypervisor base
address (it should be within area you reserved with 'memmap=' earlier),
a mask of CPUs assigned to the cell (for root cells, it's 0xff, or all
CPUs in the system), the list of memory regions and the permissions this
cell has to them, I/O ports bitmap (0 marks a port as cell-accessible),
and the list of PCI devices.

Each Jailhouse cell has its own config file, so you'll have one config
for the root cell describing the platform Jailhouse executes on (like
qemu-vm.c we saw above) and several others for each running cell. It's
possible for inmates to share one config file (and thus one cell), but
then only one of these inmates will be active at given time.

In order to launch an inmate, you need to create its cell first:

sudo tools/jailhouse cell create configs/apic-demo.cell

apic-demo.cell is cell configuration file that comes with Jailhouse (I
also assume you still use QEMU setup described earlier). This cell
doesn't use any PCI devices, but in more complex cases it is recommended
to unload Linux drivers before moving devices to the cell with this
command.

Now, the inmate image can be loaded into memory:

sudo tools/jailhouse cell load apic-demo inmates/demos/x86/apic-demo.bin
-a 0xf0000

Jailhouse treats all inmates as opaque binaries, and although it
provides a small framework to develop them faster, the only thing it
needs to know about the inmate image is its base address. Jailhouse
expects an inmate entry point at 0xffff0 (which is different from x86
reset vector). apic-demo.bin is a standard demo inmate that comes with
Jailhouse, and inmates framework linker script ensures that if the
binary is mapped at 0xf0000, the entry point will be at the right
address. 'apic-demo' is just a name, and it can be almost anything you
want.

Finally, start the cell with:

tools/jailhouse cell start apic-demo

Now, switch back to the terminal you run QEMU from. You'll see lines
like this one are being sent to the serial port:

Calibrated APIC frequency: 1000008 kHz Timer fired, jitter: 38400 ns,
min: 38400 ns, max: 38400 ns ...

apic-demo is a purely demonstrational inmate. It programs APIC timer
(found on each contemporary CPU's core) to fire at 10 Hz, and measures
actual time between the events happening. Jitter is the difference
between the expected and actual time (the latency), and the smaller it
is, the less visible (in terms of performance) the hypervisor is.
Although this test isn't quite comprehensive, it is important as
Jailhouse targets realtime inmates and needs to be as lightweight as
possible.

Jailhouse also provides some means for getting cell statistics. At the
most basic level, there is sysfs interface under /sys/devices/jailhouse.
Several tools exist that pretty-print this data. For instance, you can
list cells currently on the system with:

sudo tools/jailhouse cell list

For more detailed statistics, run:

sudo tools/jailhouse cell stats apic-demo

The data you see is updated periodically (as in top utility) and contains
various low-level counters like the number of hypercalls issued, or the
number of I/O port accesses. The lifetime total and per-second values are
given for each entry. It's mainly for developers, but higher numbers mean
the inmate causes hypervisor involvement more often, thus degrading the
performance. Ideally, these should be close to zero, as jitter in apic-demo.
To exit the tool, press Q.

Tearing down
------------

Jailhouse comes with several demo inmates, not only apic-demo. Let's try
something different. Stop the inmate with:

sudo tools/jailhouse cell destroy apic-demo JAILHOUSE_CELL_DESTROY:
Operation not permitted

What's the reason? Remember apic-demo cell had 'running/locked' state in
the cell list. Jailhouse introduces locked state to prevent changes to
the configuration; a cell that locks the hypervisor is essentially more
important than the root one (think it does some critical job at the
power plant while Linux is mostly for management purposes on that
system). Luckily, apic-demo is a toy inmate and it unlocks Jailhouse
after the first shutdown attempt, so the second one should succeed.
Execute the command above one more time, and apic-demo should disappear
from the cell listing.

Now, create tiny-demo cell (which is originally for tiny-demo.bin, also
from the Jailhouse demo inmates set) and load 32-bit-demo.bin into it
the usual way:

sudo tools/jailhouse cell create configs/tiny-demo.cell sudo
tools/jailhouse cell load tiny-demo inmates/demos/x86/32-bit-demo.bin -a
0xf0000 sudo tools/jailhouse cell start tiny-demo

Look into com2.txt in the host (the same directory you started QEMU
from). Not only this shows that cells can be reused by the inmates
provided they have compatible resource requirements, it is also a proof
that Jailhouse can run 32-bit inmates (the hypervisor itself and the
root cell always run in 64-bit mode).

When you are done with Jailhouse, you can disable it with:

sudo tools/jailhouse disable

For this to succeed, the must be no cells in "running/locked" state.

This is the end of our short trip to Jailhouse: I hope you enjoyed your
stay. For now, Jailhouse is not a ready-to-consume product, so you may
not see an immediate use of it. However, it's actively developed and
somewhat unique to Linux ecosystem, and if you have a need for real-time
application virtualization, it makes sense to keep a close eye on its
progress.

Jailhouse for real
------------------

QEMU is great for giving Jailhouse a try, but it's also possible to test
it on real hardware. However, you should never do this on your PC: with
low-level tool Jailhouse is, you can easily hang your root cell where
Linux runs, which may result in filesystem and data corruption.

Jailhouse comes with helper tool to generate cell configs, but usually
you still need to tweak the resultant file. The tool depends on Python;
if you don't have it on your testing board, Jailhouse lets you to
collect required data and generate the configuration on your main Linux
PC (it's safe):

sudo tools/jailhouse config collect data.tar

Copy data.tar to your PC or notebook and untar

tools/jailhouse config create -r path/to/untarred/data configs/myboard.c

Configuration tool reads many files under /proc and /sys (either
collected or directly), analyzes them and generates memory regions, PCI
devices list and other things required for Jailhouse to run.

Post-processing the generated config is mostly trial and error process.
You enable Jailhouse and try to do something. If the system locks up,
you analyze serial output and decide if you need to grant access. If you
are trying to run Jailhouse on a memory-constrained system (less than 1
GB RAM), be careful with hypervisor memory area, as the configuration
tool can currently get it wrong. Don't forget to reserve memory for
Jailhouse through kernel command line the same way you did it with QEMU.
On some AMD-based systems, you may need to adjust Memory Mapped I/O
(MMIO) regions, because Jailhouse doesn't support AMD IOMMU technology
yet while the configuration tool implies it.

To capture Jailhouse serial output, you'll likely need serial-to-USB
adapter and null modem cable. Many modern motherboards come with no COM
ports, but they have headers you can connect a socket to. Once you connect
your board to main Linux PC, run minicom or alike to see the output (remember
to set port's baud rate to 115200 in program's settings).

References
----------

1.  Static System Partitioning and KVM (KVM Forum 2013 slides):
    https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B6HTUUWSPdd-Zl93MVhlMnRJRjg
2.  kvm-kmod homepage: http://git.kiszka.org/?p=kvm-kmod.git
