Jailhouse Interface for Cells
=============================

The Jailhouse hypervisor provides two kinds of interfaces to interact with its
cells during runtime. One is a set of hypercalls which cells can be invoked
synchronously by executing architecture specific instructions that switch to
hypervisor mode. The other interface consists of variables located in a
per-cell memory region that is shared between hypervisor and that particular
cell.


Hypercalls
----------

A hypercall is typically issued via a designated instruction that causes a
context switch from guest to hypervisor mode. Before causing the mode switch, a
cell has to prepare potential arguments of the call in predefined registers or
a known memory location. A return code of the completed hypercall is passed via
a similar channel. Details of the hypercall ABI are architecture specific and
will be defined in the following.


Intel x86-64 ABI
- - - - - - - -

Instruction:    vmcall
Hypercall code: RAX
1. argument:    RDI
2. argument:    RSI
3. argument:    RDX
4. argument:    RCX
Return code:    RAX


Hypercall "Disable" (code 0)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Tries to destroy all non-Linux cells and then shuts down the hypervisor,
returning full control over the hardware back to Linux.

This hypercall can only be issued on CPUs belonging to the Linux cell.

Arguments: none

Return code: 0 on success, negative error code otherwise

    Possible errors are:
        -EPERM  (-1) - hypercall was issued over a non-Linux cell or an active
                       cell rejected the shutdown request


Hypercall "Cell Create" (code 1)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Creates a new cell according to the provided configuration, then set all
cell CPUs to an architecture-specific reset state. At least one CPU will then
execute the bootstrap code that must have been loaded into the cell's memory
at the reset address before invoking this hypercall. See cell-environments.txt
for details on the reset state of cell CPUs.

This hypercall can only be issued on CPUs belonging to the Linux cell.

Arguments: 1. Guest-physical address of cell configuration (see
              configuration-format.txt for details)

Return code: positive cell ID or negative error code

    Possible errors are:
        -EPERM  (-1)  - hypercall was issued over a non-root cell or an active
                        cell denied system reconfiguration
        -E2BIG  (-7)  - configuration data too large to process
        -ENOMEM (-12) - insufficient hypervisor-internal memory
        -EBUSY  (-16) - a resource of the new cell is already in use by another
                        non-root cell, or the caller's CPU is supposed to be
                        given to the new cell
        -EEXIST (-17) - a cell with the given name already exists
        -EINVAL (-22) - incorrect or inconsistent configuration data


Hypercall "Cell Destroy" (code 2)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Destroys the cell of the provided name, returning its resources to the root
cell if they are part of the system configuration, i.e. belonged to the root
cell directly after hypervisor start.

This hypercall can only be issued on CPUs belonging to the root cell.

Arguments: 1. ID of cell to be destroyed

Return code: 0 on success, negative error code otherwise

    Possible errors are:
        -EPERM  (-1)  - hypercall was issued over a non-root cell, the target
                        cell rejected the destruction request or another active
                        cell denied system reconfiguration
        -ENOENT (-2)  - cell with provided ID does not exist
        -ENOMEM (-12) - insufficient hypervisor-internal memory for
                        reconfiguration
        -EINVAL (-22) - root cell specified, which cannot be destroyed

Note: The root cell uses ID 0. Passing this ID to "Cell Destroy" is illegal.


Hypercall "Hypervisor Get Info" (code 3)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Obtain information about specific hypervisor states.

This hypercall can only be issued on CPUs belonging to the root cell.

Arguments: 1. Information type:
        0 - number of pages in hypervisor memory pool
        1 - used pages of hypervisor memory pool
        2 - number of pages in hypervisor remapping pool
        3 - used pages of hypervisor remapping pool

Return code: requested value (>=0) or negative error code

    Possible errors are:
        -EPERM  (-1)  - hypercall was issued over a non-root cell
        -EINVAL (-22) - invalid information type


Hypercall "Cell Get State" (code 4)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Obtain information about the state of a specific cell.

Arguments: 1. ID of cell to be queried

This hypercall can only be issued on CPUs belonging to the root cell.

Return code: cell state (>=0) or negative error code

    Valid cell states are:
        0 - Running
        1 - Shut down
        2 - Failed

    Possible errors are:
        -EPERM  (-1)  - hypercall was issued over a non-root cell
        -EINVAL (-22) - cell state is invalid


Hypercall "CPU Get State" (code 5)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Obtain information about the state of a specific CPU.

Arguments: 1. logical ID of CPU to be queried

Return code: CPU state (>=0) or negative error code

    Possible CPU states are:
        0 - Running
        2 - Failed

    Possible errors are:
        -EPERM  (-1)  - hypercall was issued over a non-root cell and the CPU
                        does not belong to the issuing cell
        -EINVAL (-22) - invalid CPU ID


Communication Region
--------------------

The communication region is a per-cell shared memory area that both the
hypervisor and the particular cell can read from and write to. It is an
optional communication mechanism. If the region shall be used by a cell, it
has to be mapped into the cell's address space via its configuration (see
configuration-format.txt for details).


Communication region layout
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

        +------------------------------+ - begin of communication region
        |   Message to Cell (32 bit)   |   (lower address)
        +------------------------------+
        |  Message from Cell (32 bit)  |
        +------------------------------+
        |     Cell State (32 bit)      |
        +------------------------------+ - higher address

All fields use the native endianness of the system.


Logical Channel "Message"
- - - - - - - - - - - - -

The first logical channel of the region is formed by the fields "Message to
Cell" and "Message from Cell". The hypervisor uses this channel to inform the
cell about specific state changes in the system or request permission to
perform state changes that the cell can affect.

Before the hypervisor sends a new message, it first sets the "Message from
Cell" field to 0. It then writes a non-zero message code in the "Message to
Cell" field. Finally the hypervisor reads from the "Message from Cell" field
in order to receive the cell's answer.

For answering a message, the cell first has to clear the "Message to Cell"
field. It then has to write a non-zero reply code into the "Message from Cell"
field.

Write ordering of all updates has to be ensured by both the hypervisor
and the cell according to the requirements of the hardware architecture.

The hypervisor may wait for a message reply by spinning until the "Message from
Cell" field becomes non-zero. Therefore, a cell should check for pending
messages periodically and answer them as soon as possible. The hypervisor will
not use a CPU assigned to non-root cell to wait for message replies, but long
message responds times may still affect the root cell negatively.

The following messages and corresponding replies are defined:

 - Shutdown Requested (code 1):
        The cell is supposed to be shut down, either to destroy only the cell
        itself or to disable the hypervisor completely.

   Possible replies:
        1 - Shutdown denied
        2 - Shutdown OK

Note: The hypervisor does not request shutdown permission from a cell if that
      cell has the "Unmanaged Exit" flag set in its configuration (see also
      configuration-format.txt) or if the cell state is set to "Shut Down" or
      "Failed" (see below).


Logical Channel "Cell State"
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

The cell state field provides the second logical channel. On cell startup, it
is initialized by the hypervisor to the state "Running". From then on, the
field becomes conceptually read-only for the hypervisor and will just be
updated by the cell itself. The following states are defined:

 - Running (code 0)
 - Shut down (code 1), terminal state
 - Failed (code 2), terminal state

Terminal states are immutable, thus cannot be left anymore once reached until
the cell is destroyed.
